Health does not simply mean the absence of diseases or physical fitness. The WHO has recently defined health as “a state of complete social, physical and mental well-being and not merely the absence of infirmity or disease.”

Maintaining a proper health and hygiene prevents the  spread of diseases. Let’s discuss more facts about the personal hygiene.

Health And Diseases

Maintaining good health
Hand hygiene

There is no substitute for good knowledge about the working of your body which is why we all need doctors so much. A combination of balanced diet, personal hygiene, and regular exercise are very important to maintain good health. Yoga is also another method through which the health of both mind and body can be maintained. Hygiene is very important for good health.Therefore we need to wash our hands regularly with a liquid or a soap especially:

Before eating
After using toilets
After playing with pets and touching dirty hands
After sneezing, coughing and blowing nose.
Once after coming back from outside.
Maintaining the proper hand hygiene helps in preventing organisms from entering our body.

Diseases


When one or more organs or systems of our body are adversely affected as in their normal functioning is interrupted, we say that we are not healthy i.e., we have a disease. The diseases are normally caused by external organisms (microbes) intersecting the body’s natural barriers and invading into our healthy body. Such organisms can cause a havoc if our immune system doesn’t handle it right away.

Diseases can be broadly grouped into two groups; infectious disease and non-infectious disease.

Diseases that can be transmitted from one person to another are termed Infectious diseases. Most of the diseases affecting man are the infectious disease which includes the common cold, throat infections, dysentery, fever, chicken pox,  urinary tract infections, etc.
Diseases that do not spread from person to person are called non-infectious diseases. Cancer is a major non-infectious disease.
