The f-Block and d-Block Elements
The d-block elements show transitional properties between s- and p- block elements and include elements of group 3 to 12. Their outer shell electronic configuration is (n-1)d1-10ns0-2. They include elements like iron, copper, zinc, gold, silver, mercury, etc. The f-block elements show transitional properties between the s-block and the d-block in rows 6 (the Lanthanides) and 7 (the Actinides). Their outer shell electronic configuration is (n-2)f1-14 (n-1)d0-2 ns2. They include elements like uranium. In this section, we will discuss the application of some of the f- and d-block elements.

f-Block and d-Block Elements
f-Block and d-Block Elements Highlighted in green and blue

Applications of f-Block and d-Block Elements
Transitional elements are excellent conductors of heat and electricity.
Chromium plating is used to protect metals from corrosion. Chromium is also used in making stainless steel.
d-block elements
Chromium Plating

Copper and zinc are used to make the common alloy, brass.
Titanium is used in making automotive – airplane engines and parts due to its immense strength and resistance to corrosion. It is also used to detect underwater sound.
Iron is one of the most important and abundant elements which is used in building industries. Its alloy, steel is one of the most common alloys extensively used in the construction of bridges, utensils, furniture, tools, drills, etc.
Manganese is used in making batteries and cells.
Gold, silver, and copper are known as coinage metals as they were used to make coins.
Copper is a good conductor of electricity and is used for making conducting wires and motors. It is also used in making a number of commercially useful alloys.
Silver is used for making jewelry, batteries, and mirrors.
Gold is one of the most coveted metals is known for making expensive jewelry.
Zinc is mixed with other metals to form alloys of commercial importance such as aluminum solder and brass. It is also used for making paints, cosmetics, batteries and electrical equipment.
Uranium is used for making nuclear weapons.
The f- and d-block elements are also used as catalysts in chemical reactions.
